Blueprint for EP025 epic_loop_detection via LLDP (#181)
kytos-ng/kytos: docs/blueprints/EP025.rst

- ``switches.<dpid>.metadata.ignored_loops``:

This is for configuring which loops should be ignored on a ``<dpid>``, the value is a list of list pair of interface port numbers. For instance, if it's desirable to ignore a loop between interface number 5 and 6, and also between port 1 and itself: ``[[5, 6], [1,1]]``

- ``interfaces.<interface_id>.metadata.looped``:

This ``looped`` attribute is for state management, it will contain the following object whenever a loop is in place:

.. code-block:: python3

   {
     'port_number': <int>
     'created_at': <str>, in this format %Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S
   }

Looped states should be removed if the interface has been disabled or deactivated, also there should be a periodic routine to remove the ``looped`` metadata interface state if the loop hasn't been detected anymore, this clean up routine should run at a lower pace than of_lldp polling, usually 3-4 times slower, and if the loop hasn't been seen within this time frame again then it would assume that the loop has stopped.

The following options would be configurable on settings:

- ``LLDP_LOOP_ACTIONS``:

> This is for configuring which actions should be taken once a loop is found. The actions are a list of strings, ``log`` and ``disable`` are both supported. The ``log`` action will log an warning message informing that a loop was detected on a dpid and on which interfaces. The ``disable`` action will disable an interface via the ``topology`` NApp. For instance, ``['log', 'disable']`` would apply both actions to any loop that isn't ignored and is found. The default actions would be ``['log', 'disable']``.

Author: I figured having both `log` and `disable` as default actions that would probably be the safest for production in case any unintentional loop happens, since `disable` would also emit a topology event `kytos/topology.link_down` that `mef_eline`  will react too, and also pathfinder would find new paths over it. Let me know if that's what's desirable to have in production by default.

:EP: 25
:Title: Interface loop detection via LLDP
:Authors:
    - Italo Valcy <idasilva AT fiu DOT edu>
    - Vinicius Arcanjo <vindasil AT fiu DOT edu>
    - Antonio Francisco <ajoaoff AT gmail DOT com>
    - Jeronimo Bezerra <jbezerra AT fiu DOT edu>
    - Rogerio Motitsuki <rogerio.motitsuki AT gmail DOT com>
:Created: 2022-02-22
:Kytos-Version:
:Status: Draft

*****************************************
EP025 - Interface loop detection via LLDP
*****************************************

Abstract
========

This blueprint proposes a loop detection mechanism on interfaces of a switch via LLDP, leveraging ``of_lldp`` existing capabilities, and also which events, states and configuration options will be available.

Motivation
==========

> A loop on a switch interface can be intentionally or not. Typically, intentional loops are for re-injecting packets in the switch pipeline to perform another packet transformation. On the other hand, unintentional loops can lead to major dataplane problems, especially if that interface has significant network traffic being being forwarded. A loop detection mechanism via LLDP will empower operators to define certain actions to be taken when a loop happens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A loop on a switch interface can be intentional or not. Typically, intentional loops are for re-injecting packets in the switch pipeline to perform another packet transformation. On the other hand, unintentional loops can lead to major data plane problems, especially if that interface has significant network traffic being forwarded. A loop detection mechanism via LLDP will empower operators to define certain actions to be taken when a loop happens.
```

Author: Appreciated these fixes, Italo, let me commit them.

Specification
=============

It is desirable to support ignored loops configuration that can be changed dynamically via API. Since this feature is relatively small and wouldn't require much extra entries or states, then using `topology` switches' and interfaces' metadata storage would simplify the implementation and maintenance since currently adding support to a new storage with storehouse requires a significant effort development-wise. In the future, this can be migrated to another storage (collection) when an alternative is available. The following metadata would be used:

- ``switches.<dpid>.metadata.ignored_loops``:

This is for configuring which loops should be ignored on a ``<dpid>``, the value is a list of list pair of interface port numbers. For instance, if it's desirable to ignore a loop between interface number 5 and 6, and also between port 1 and itself: ``[[5, 6], [1,1]]``

- ``interfaces.<interface_id>.metadata.looped``:

> This ``looped`` attribute is for state management, it will contain the following object whenever a loop is in place, the ``detected_at`` string datetime will be in UTC without any ``Z`` modifier:

Reviewer: `detected_at` will be the time when the loop was first seen or last seen? It would be useful for operators to know when the loop was first detected, while it would be helpful for the cleanup mechanism to know when it was last seen.

Author: `detected_at` exposed on `metadata.looped` currently represents when it was first seen, and then we also have a `updated_at`, that is an internal implementation (not currently exposed on metadata), which the clean up mechanism relies on it to confirm when it was last seen. yep, so it's aligned with this comment you've made, Italo. I'll also make an update in the blueprint trying to explain it better just so future readers don't get confused.

Author: Updated it on this commit https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/181/commits/8f0209873300ceea6ec05a74b34b7dde76356131, let me know if you think it's clearer.

Reviewer: Very nice, Vinicius! Yes it is very clear, and having the `updated_at` an internal implementation will be very helpful in the future!

.. code-block:: python3

   {
     'port_numbers': [<int>, <int>]

>      'detected_at': <str>, in this format %Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S

Author: Currently, the helper core function [`get_time`](https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/blob/master/kytos/core/helpers.py#L177 ) doesn't support parsing with the `Z`, and also other python core libraries like `datetime.now().isoformat()` they typically omit the Z when it's already UTC 0. We could try to patch this on core and try to standardize, but if time zones won't be used and if UTC is by default it's probably easier to maintain as it is.

>      'detected_at': <str>, in this format %Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S

Reviewer 2: So, let's document that we will be using UTC for timezone.

>      'detected_at': <str>, in this format %Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S

Author: For sure, I'll push a commit documenting this.

>      'detected_at': <str>, in this format %Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S

Author: Done here https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/181/commits/860d662bea376cadb945d7aced98aae8293cd54d

   }

> Looped states should be removed if the interface has been disabled or deactivated, also there should be a periodic routine to remove the ``looped`` metadata interface state if the loop hasn't been detected anymore, this clean up routine should run at a lower pace than of_lldp polling, usually 3-4 times slower, and if the loop hasn't been seen within this time frame again then it would assume that the loop has stopped.

Author: If this were to be performed or only triggered by an admin or operator, then any detected loops wouldn't get considered stopped (unless the interface goes active False), at the moment it's being used to detect when a loop hasn't been seeing anymore after some of_lldp polling iterations, and in that case the administrator would also have to be responsible to consider if the loop has stopped. I'm not sure if that would be that practical @jab1982, could you confirm the understanding here or if you're thinking about other use case?

> Looped states should be removed if the interface has been disabled or deactivated, also there should be a periodic routine to remove the ``looped`` metadata interface state if the loop hasn't been detected anymore, this clean up routine should run at a lower pace than of_lldp polling, usually 3-4 times slower, and if the loop hasn't been seen within this time frame again then it would assume that the loop has stopped.

Reviewer 2: If the routine already does that, that's fine. We are mixing implementation with blueprint, but since we have code operational, let's not change what's working.

> Looped states should be removed if the interface has been disabled or deactivated, also there should be a periodic routine to remove the ``looped`` metadata interface state if the loop hasn't been detected anymore, this clean up routine should run at a lower pace than of_lldp polling, usually 3-4 times slower, and if the loop hasn't been seen within this time frame again then it would assume that the loop has stopped.

Author: Right. Sounds good. So I'll mark this thread as resolved. Appreciated your feedback.

The following options would be configurable on settings:

- ``LLDP_LOOP_ACTIONS``:

> This is for configuring which actions should be taken once a loop is found. The actions are a list of strings, ``log`` and ``disable`` are both supported. The ``log`` action will log an warning message informing that a loop was detected on a dpid and on which interfaces. The ``disable`` action will disable an interface via the ``topology`` NApp, and eventually enable it again if the loop stops. For instance, ``['log', 'disable']`` would apply both actions to any loop that isn't ignored and is found. The default actions would be ``['log']`` based on what's expected to be used in production in this first iteration.

Author: @jab1982 indeed, it's confusing when I read this again, the intention here of `disable` would be to disable via the `topology` NApp using this endpoint `/api/kytos/topology/v3/interfaces/<intf_id>/disable`, and the `enable` again part would be to undo the disable, so calling the `/api/kytos/topology/v3/interfaces/<intf_id>/enable` to enable it again once the loop has stopped. These topology endpoints, at the moment, they don't send a `PortMod` [and an issue has been mapped recently for this](https://github.com/kytos-ng/topology/issues/72), so the disable/enable would affect the `enable` state, which currently it would imply that pathfinder wouldn't be able to find a path there, and mef_eline ideally should react too, but there's a missing topology event in this endpoint as well  and it's only sending `kytos/topology.updated` (that mef_eline doesn't subscribe to), so EVCs wouldn't converge, however, once we have that issue 72 prioritized it should also enable the full blown usage. Does that clarify the understanding? I'll augment the phrase with more information.

> This is for configuring which actions should be taken once a loop is found. The actions are a list of strings, ``log`` and ``disable`` are both supported. The ``log`` action will log an warning message informing that a loop was detected on a dpid and on which interfaces. The ``disable`` action will disable an interface via the ``topology`` NApp, and eventually enable it again if the loop stops. For instance, ``['log', 'disable']`` would apply both actions to any loop that isn't ignored and is found. The default actions would be ``['log']`` based on what's expected to be used in production in this first iteration.

Author: @jab1982 updated this paragraph on this commit https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/181/commits/141b0f8b776b455f8f781d36de2c4ac89f7fdec3, let me know if it's less confusing now.

- ``LOOP_LOG_EVERY``:

> This is for configuring which frequency in seconds the `log` action should emit a log whenever a loop is found, by default it's 60 seconds, this is for avoiding a flood of messages.

Author: Yes, @jab1982, it's customizable in the settings, with 60 seconds, every 60 seconds it would log a message similar to this one: 

```
kytos $> 2022-03-02 11:37:41,389 - WARNING [kytos.napps.kytos/of_lldp] (ThreadPoolExecutor-0_5) LLDP loop detected on switch: 00:00:00:00:00:00:00:01, interfaces: ['s1-eth1', 's1-eth2'], port_numbers: [1, 2]
```

Let me know which frequency it should be shipped in the settings by default if you have any other value in mind.

> This is for configuring which frequency in seconds the `log` action should emit a log whenever a loop is found, by default it's 60 seconds, this is for avoiding a flood of messages.

Reviewer 2: I would say every 300 seconds or more.

> This is for configuring which frequency in seconds the `log` action should emit a log whenever a loop is found, by default it's 60 seconds, this is for avoiding a flood of messages.

Author: Right. So, let's use 300 by default. Done here https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/181/commits/4f29a85834b54b18defe00007c1f326d1259dcc7.

> This is for configuring which actions should be taken once a loop is found. The actions are a list of strings, ``log`` and ``disable`` are both supported. The ``log`` action will log an warning message informing that a loop was detected on a dpid and on which interfaces. The ``disable`` action will disable an interface via the ``topology`` NApp (through the ``topology/v3/interfaces/<intf_id>/disable`` endpoint), and eventually enable it again if the loop stops (through the ``topology/v3/interfaces/<intf_id>/enable`` endpoint). For instance, ``['log', 'disable']`` would apply both actions to any loop that isn't ignored and is found. The default actions would be ``['log']`` based on what's expected to be used in production in this first iteration.

Reviewer: Those are the "default" actions, right? Have you considered the possibility of having port-specific actions + default actions (which applies if there is no port-specific ones) ?

Author: Yes, they're default actions for any interface. Nope, I haven't considered in this iteration, I think it's a great idea, let me know if you think it's going to be used in prod @italovalcy, if it's likely then it might be worth adding in the scope of this iteration here. 

To support that isn't that far away, we've got a [method that is called whenever a non-ignored loop is found](https://github.com/kytos-ng/of_lldp/blob/feature/loop_detection/loop_manager.py#L99-L104), and it takes both interfaces, so it'd be a matter of parametrizing and passing the options o be checked if it has interface specific config. If we we'll try to support that in this iteration, it's also good to know if operators would need to change this settings dynamically via metadata/API or if on settings would be OK for now.

Author: I've updated on this commit https://github.com/kytos-ng/kytos/pull/181/commits/78210212713ca9033c2f56f8a00887f674105721 highlighting they're default actions.

Reviewer: Thanks Vinicius! Well, I think it is not likely to be consumed right away, so I agree that we can do this next interaction.

Events
======

The following events will be published and subscribed.

Subscribed
----------

- ``kytos/topology.topology_loaded``
- ``kytos/topology.link_down``
- ``kytos/topology.interface.disabled`` (not implemented on topology yet)

Published
---------

kytos.of_lldp/loop.detected
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*buffer*: ``app``

Event reporting that a loop has been detected.

Content:

.. code-block:: python3

   {
     'dpid': <str>,
     'interface_id': <str>,
     'port_numbers': [<int>, <int>],
   }

kytos.of_lldp/loop.stopped
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*buffer*: ``app``

Event reporting that a loop has been stopped.

Content:

.. code-block:: python3

   {
     'dpid': <str>,
     'interface_id': <str>,
     'port_numbers': [<int>, <int>],

>    }

Author: Sure, let's map what's going to be needed. 

1 - Endpoint to return all the current detected loops, maybe we can return this structure here, indexed by each dpid, and each primary looped interface, that's close enough to how we have it stored, let me know if that would suffice:

```
{
  "00:00:00:00:00:00:00:01": {
    "00:00:00:00:00:00:00:01:1": {
      "state": "detected",
      "port_numbers": [
        1,
        2
      ],
      "updated_at": "2022-03-02T18:55:51",
      "detected_at": "2022-03-02T18:55:26"
    }
  }
}
```

2  - I think we can "force" checking (or reading again) the existing detected loops when consulting the endpoint that list all of the existing loops (and if any new were detected in the meantime it would be there), that would it simplify or did you mean a way to force to send new LLDP probes to check for loops again?

>    }

Author: I've synced with Jeronimo, we'll address this in a next iteration.
